docs/best_practices/integration_checklist.rst, before:

ToolShed Readiness Checklist
============================

The process from writing a tool to getting it into a ToolShed can be long and
arduous and confusing. This checklist should assist in making sure you have
done everything required for a great, easy to use Galaxy Tool!

Before ToolShed
---------------

- A `GitHub <https://github.com/>`__ repository should exist for your wrappers, either one you own, or perhaps you are contributing to the `IUC's repository <https://github.com/galaxyproject/tools-iuc>`__.
- A tool directory should exist for the specific set of tools or related functionality you are wrapping.
- Check `Bioconda <https://bioconda.github.io/>`__ for available packages required for the tool you are wrapping. If they do not exist, you may need to create them. The `IUC <https://galaxyproject.org/iuc>`__ will be happy to help you with doing this.
- `Planemo <http://planemo.readthedocs.io/en/latest/readme.html>`__ should be installed (``pip install -U planemo``)
- You will need to have credentials to access your ToolShed (either the `Main
  ToolShed <https://toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/>`__, or your local Galactic ToolShed).

Creating the Tool Wrapper (XML File)
------------------------------------

- Review the `IUC's Best Practices for Tools <http://galaxy-iuc-standards.readthedocs.io/en/latest/best_practices/tool_xml.html>`__.
- Consult the `Galaxy Tool XML File schema <https://docs.galaxyproject.org/en/master/dev/schema.html>`__.
- Create your tool wrapper with a command like ``planemo tool_init --id 'tool_name' --name 'Tool description'``. 
- Alternatively, you could copy and modify `an existing IUC wrapper <https://github.com/galaxyproject/tools-iuc/tree/master/tools>`__.
- Give your tool an appropriate ``ID`` and ``name`` by consulting the `IUC's Best Practices for Tools <http://galaxy-iuc-standards.readthedocs.io/en/latest/best_practices/tool_xml.html>`__. The ``ID`` is usually the same as the name of the tool XML file and directory.
- Define a `Tool Version <http://galaxy-iuc-standards.readthedocs.io/en/latest/best_practices/tool_xml.html#tool-versions>`__ for the wrapper. If it is the first wrapper, is recommended to use the same version as the tool in the requirement.
- Add a short tool `Description <http://galaxy-iuc-standards.readthedocs.io/en/latest/best_practices/tool_xml.html#tool-descriptions>`__.
- Fill in the `Requirements <https://docs.galaxyproject.org/en/latest/dev/schema.html#tool-requirements>`__ section with the conda package name and version number for the tool and its dependencies.
- Add the `Version Command <https://docs.galaxyproject.org/en/master/dev/schema.html#tool-version-command>`__ that specifies the command to get the tool’s version.
- Add the `Command <http://galaxy-iuc-standards.readthedocs.io/en/latest/best_practices/tool_xml.html#command-tag>`__ section. The command to run the tool must be within `CDATA tags <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CDATA>`__, written in `Cheetah <http://cheetahtemplate.org/>`__ and conform to `PEP 8 <http://pep8.org/>`__. You should add `Exit Code detection <http://galaxy-iuc-standards.readthedocs.io/en/latest/best_practices/tool_xml.html#exit-code-detection>`__ and **use single quotes** for all Input and Output parameters of type ``data``, ``data_collection`` and ``text``.
- Supply at least one `Input <https://docs.galaxyproject.org/en/latest/dev/schema.html#tool-inputs>`__ with a description of parameters. Add `Validators <https://docs.galaxyproject.org/en/latest/dev/schema.html#tool-inputs-param-validator>`__ to user input fields.
- Supply at least one `Output <https://docs.galaxyproject.org/en/latest/dev/schema.html#tool-outputs>`__ with a description of parameters. For Output that is optionally created, use `Filters <https://docs.galaxyproject.org/en/master/dev/schema.html#tool-outputs-data-filter>`__.
- Supply at least one `Test <http://galaxy-iuc-standards.readthedocs.io/en/latest/best_practices/tool_xml.html#tests>`__. The primary output is a good choice for testing. Don't forget the use of ``sim_size`` if variable data is included.
- Add a `Help <http://galaxy-iuc-standards.readthedocs.io/en/latest/best_practices/tool_xml.html#help-tag>`__ section written in `valid reStructuredText <http://rst.ninjs.org>`__ within CDATA tags.
- Add a `Citation <https://docs.galaxyproject.org/en/latest/dev/schema.html#tool-citations>`__ section with a citation for the tool, preferably a `DOI <https://www.doi.org/>`__.
- If your tool uses `built-in data <https://galaxyproject.org/admin/data-integration>`__:
    - Provide the comment-only ``tool-data/data_table_name.loc.sample`` file
    - Provide the comment-only ``tool_data_table_conf.xml.sample`` file
- Check that the XML elements and parameters attributes are in the `Order specified in the Best Practices <http://galaxy-iuc-standards.readthedocs.io/en/latest/best_practices/tool_xml.html#coding-style>`__.
- If you have a collection of related tools you can try to avoid duplicating XML by using a `Macros XML file <http://planemo.readthedocs.io/en/latest/writing_standalone.html#macros>`__       
- Use 4 spaces for indentation.

Testing Your Tool
-----------------

- Fill the ``test-data`` directory with at least one input file and the expected
  output file. 
- It is strongly encouraged that you use small test data sets, ideally
  under 1 Mb. Every Galaxy instance that downloads your tool will
  have to download an entire copy of the test data. If the sum of your
  test-data files is larger than that, consider use of ``contains`` and
  test for a small subset of the output, see the `CWPair2 example <https://docs.galaxyproject.org/en/master/dev/schema.html#id80>`__.
- If your tool uses tool-data: 
    - Provide a ``tool_data_table_conf.xml.test`` file, which is an uncommented version of ``tool_data_table_conf.xml.sample`` containing the path to the loc file for testing: ``<file path="${__HERE__}/test-data/data_table_name.loc" />``
      (Please note the use of ``${__HERE__}`` to indicate the directory where the tool is).
    - Provide the .loc file: ``test-data/data_table_name.loc``
    - For a good example of how to test parameters from data tables, please see the `Bowtie example <https://github.com/galaxyproject/tools-devteam/tree/master/tools/bowtie_wrappers>`__.
- Check your tool XML with ``planemo lint``.
- Run functional tool tests in a local Galaxy with ``planemo test``.
- Serve the tool on a local Galaxy instance for manual verification that everything looks as expected with the ``planemo serve`` command.

Uploading Your Tool to a ToolShed
----------------------------------

- Ensure you have a ``.shed.yml`` file with the appropriate contents.
- Check the ``.shed.yml`` with ``planemo shed_lint``.
- Create the remote repository with ``planemo shed_create --shed_target [toolshed|your_local_shed:9000]``.

Adding Your Tool to the IUC Repository
--------------------------------------

- `Create an issue on IUC GitHub <https://github.com/galaxyproject/tools-iuc/issues>`__, tracking your progress and ensuring that no one else is working on the same tool.
- Fork IUC GitHub on your GitHub account.
- Clone the corresponding repository ``git clone https://github.com/<YOUR_NAME>/tools-iuc tools-iuc``
- Within that folder, create a corresponding branch with ``git checkout -b
  $branch_name``. You might name it after the tool.
- After you have tested your tool and are completely happy with it (per
  previous sections of this document), add your tool and all associated data,
  then Commit the changes with ``git commit -m "I changed X, Y, and Z"``. Finally push your changes to github with ``git push origin $branch_name``.
- Go to the `IUC's Repository <https://github.com/galaxyproject/tools-iuc>`__ and click on 'Compare & Pull Request'.
- Add a comment describing what the tool and any extra information that might
  be needed (E.g. "I had some trouble with the data tables, can someone please
  double check them").
- The IUC will review your tool for inclusion.
- Note that any Python code submitted to IUC must conform to `PEP 8 <http://pep8.org/>`__, in order to pass the `flake8 <http://flake8.pycqa.org/en/latest/>`__ `Travis CI <https://travis-ci.org/>`__ testing.

Commit message:

Rewrite best practices to encourage tabs
While still allowing spaces, and just promoting consistency.
Fixes #73

docs/best_practices/integration_checklist.rst, after:

ToolShed Readiness Checklist
============================

The process from writing a tool to getting it into a ToolShed can be long and
arduous and confusing. This checklist should assist in making sure you have
done everything required for a great, easy to use Galaxy Tool!

Before ToolShed
---------------

- A `GitHub <https://github.com/>`__ repository should exist for your wrappers, either one you own, or perhaps you are contributing to the `IUC's repository <https://github.com/galaxyproject/tools-iuc>`__.
- A tool directory should exist for the specific set of tools or related functionality you are wrapping.
- Check `Bioconda <https://bioconda.github.io/>`__ for available packages required for the tool you are wrapping. If they do not exist, you may need to create them. The `IUC <https://galaxyproject.org/iuc>`__ will be happy to help you with doing this.
- `Planemo <http://planemo.readthedocs.io/en/latest/readme.html>`__ should be installed (``pip install -U planemo``)
- You will need to have credentials to access your ToolShed (either the `Main
  ToolShed <https://toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/>`__, or your local Galactic ToolShed).

Creating the Tool Wrapper (XML File)
------------------------------------

- Review the `IUC's Best Practices for Tools <http://galaxy-iuc-standards.readthedocs.io/en/latest/best_practices/tool_xml.html>`__.
- Consult the `Galaxy Tool XML File schema <https://docs.galaxyproject.org/en/master/dev/schema.html>`__.
- Create your tool wrapper with a command like ``planemo tool_init --id 'tool_name' --name 'Tool description'``. 
- Alternatively, you could copy and modify `an existing IUC wrapper <https://github.com/galaxyproject/tools-iuc/tree/master/tools>`__.
- Give your tool an appropriate ``ID`` and ``name`` by consulting the `IUC's Best Practices for Tools <http://galaxy-iuc-standards.readthedocs.io/en/latest/best_practices/tool_xml.html>`__. The ``ID`` is usually the same as the name of the tool XML file and directory.
- Define a `Tool Version <http://galaxy-iuc-standards.readthedocs.io/en/latest/best_practices/tool_xml.html#tool-versions>`__ for the wrapper. If it is the first wrapper, is recommended to use the same version as the tool in the requirement.
- Add a short tool `Description <http://galaxy-iuc-standards.readthedocs.io/en/latest/best_practices/tool_xml.html#tool-descriptions>`__.
- Fill in the `Requirements <https://docs.galaxyproject.org/en/latest/dev/schema.html#tool-requirements>`__ section with the conda package name and version number for the tool and its dependencies.
- Add the `Version Command <https://docs.galaxyproject.org/en/master/dev/schema.html#tool-version-command>`__ that specifies the command to get the tool’s version.
- Add the `Command <http://galaxy-iuc-standards.readthedocs.io/en/latest/best_practices/tool_xml.html#command-tag>`__ section. The command to run the tool must be within `CDATA tags <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CDATA>`__, written in `Cheetah <http://cheetahtemplate.org/>`__ and conform to `PEP 8 <http://pep8.org/>`__. You should add `Exit Code detection <http://galaxy-iuc-standards.readthedocs.io/en/latest/best_practices/tool_xml.html#exit-code-detection>`__ and **use single quotes** for all Input and Output parameters of type ``data``, ``data_collection`` and ``text``.
- Supply at least one `Input <https://docs.galaxyproject.org/en/latest/dev/schema.html#tool-inputs>`__ with a description of parameters. Add `Validators <https://docs.galaxyproject.org/en/latest/dev/schema.html#tool-inputs-param-validator>`__ to user input fields.
- Supply at least one `Output <https://docs.galaxyproject.org/en/latest/dev/schema.html#tool-outputs>`__ with a description of parameters. For Output that is optionally created, use `Filters <https://docs.galaxyproject.org/en/master/dev/schema.html#tool-outputs-data-filter>`__.
- Supply at least one `Test <http://galaxy-iuc-standards.readthedocs.io/en/latest/best_practices/tool_xml.html#tests>`__. The primary output is a good choice for testing. Don't forget the use of ``sim_size`` if variable data is included.
- Add a `Help <http://galaxy-iuc-standards.readthedocs.io/en/latest/best_practices/tool_xml.html#help-tag>`__ section written in `valid reStructuredText <http://rst.ninjs.org>`__ within CDATA tags.
- Add a `Citation <https://docs.galaxyproject.org/en/latest/dev/schema.html#tool-citations>`__ section with a citation for the tool, preferably a `DOI <https://www.doi.org/>`__.
- If your tool uses `built-in data <https://galaxyproject.org/admin/data-integration>`__:
    - Provide the comment-only ``tool-data/data_table_name.loc.sample`` file
    - Provide the comment-only ``tool_data_table_conf.xml.sample`` file
- Check that the XML elements and parameters attributes are in the `Order specified in the Best Practices <http://galaxy-iuc-standards.readthedocs.io/en/latest/best_practices/tool_xml.html#coding-style>`__.
- If you have a collection of related tools you can try to avoid duplicating XML by using a `Macros XML file <http://planemo.readthedocs.io/en/latest/writing_standalone.html#macros>`__       
- Use tabs for indentation. (4 space indentation is permitted as long as the author is consistent)

Testing Your Tool
-----------------

- Fill the ``test-data`` directory with at least one input file and the expected
  output file. 
- It is strongly encouraged that you use small test data sets, ideally
  under 1 Mb. Every Galaxy instance that downloads your tool will
  have to download an entire copy of the test data. If the sum of your
  test-data files is larger than that, consider use of ``contains`` and
  test for a small subset of the output, see the `CWPair2 example <https://docs.galaxyproject.org/en/master/dev/schema.html#id80>`__.
- If your tool uses tool-data: 
    - Provide a ``tool_data_table_conf.xml.test`` file, which is an uncommented version of ``tool_data_table_conf.xml.sample`` containing the path to the loc file for testing: ``<file path="${__HERE__}/test-data/data_table_name.loc" />``
      (Please note the use of ``${__HERE__}`` to indicate the directory where the tool is).
    - Provide the .loc file: ``test-data/data_table_name.loc``
    - For a good example of how to test parameters from data tables, please see the `Bowtie example <https://github.com/galaxyproject/tools-devteam/tree/master/tools/bowtie_wrappers>`__.
- Check your tool XML with ``planemo lint``.
- Run functional tool tests in a local Galaxy with ``planemo test``.
- Serve the tool on a local Galaxy instance for manual verification that everything looks as expected with the ``planemo serve`` command.

Uploading Your Tool to a ToolShed
----------------------------------

- Ensure you have a ``.shed.yml`` file with the appropriate contents.
- Check the ``.shed.yml`` with ``planemo shed_lint``.
- Create the remote repository with ``planemo shed_create --shed_target [toolshed|your_local_shed:9000]``.

Adding Your Tool to the IUC Repository
--------------------------------------

- `Create an issue on IUC GitHub <https://github.com/galaxyproject/tools-iuc/issues>`__, tracking your progress and ensuring that no one else is working on the same tool.
- Fork IUC GitHub on your GitHub account.
- Clone the corresponding repository ``git clone https://github.com/<YOUR_NAME>/tools-iuc tools-iuc``
- Within that folder, create a corresponding branch with ``git checkout -b
  $branch_name``. You might name it after the tool.
- After you have tested your tool and are completely happy with it (per
  previous sections of this document), add your tool and all associated data,
  then Commit the changes with ``git commit -m "I changed X, Y, and Z"``. Finally push your changes to github with ``git push origin $branch_name``.
- Go to the `IUC's Repository <https://github.com/galaxyproject/tools-iuc>`__ and click on 'Compare & Pull Request'.
- Add a comment describing what the tool and any extra information that might
  be needed (E.g. "I had some trouble with the data tables, can someone please
  double check them").
- The IUC will review your tool for inclusion.
- Note that any Python code submitted to IUC must conform to `PEP 8 <http://pep8.org/>`__, in order to pass the `flake8 <http://flake8.pycqa.org/en/latest/>`__ `Travis CI <https://travis-ci.org/>`__ testing.
